[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Throughout
history the question
has risen about the missing two
decades in the life of Jesus.
Many have speculated that
he journeyed east to become
educated by eastern mystics.
Paul Davids is
here with us today
to speak about his
film "Jesus in India,"
which gives a fascinating
glimpse into some
of the alleged evidence that
Jesus was indeed in India where
he is still revered today.
And I think that's one of the
things people would be probably
most surprised about is to hear
that the being known as Jesus
is indeed revered in
India, in Kashmir.
And we're going to get to it.
There's even a Pakistani beer
that's involved in this story.
So before we get going,
I'd like to find out first
why you decided to
take this project on.
And then give us a little bit
of the story of Ed Martin,
who we're going to be
seeing featured quite a bit
here, which is-- he seems like
such an earnest gentleman that
was really on a soul
searching journey.
So set us up.
>>PAUL DAVIDS: Well, that's
all absolutely true about Ed.
He's one of the most remarkable
people I've ever met.
And this was one of the
most challenging movies,
challenging projects
I've ever taken on.
>>REGINA: How so?
>>DAVIDS: Because it involved
4,000 miles of travel in India
under harrowing conditions.
>>REGINA: It looked like it.
>>DAVIDS: Going to
absolutely incredible places,
ancient temples of the Hindus,
Buddhist temples far up
in the mountains, meeting
with the Shankaracharya,
he is essentially
the pope of Hinduism.
And then traveling
to the Vatican
to get their point of
view about the question.
The whole issue of the missing
years, the Bible takes Jesus up
to about the age 13, giving
learned answers in the temple
to the contemporary wise
men who are so surprised
with his wisdom.
And then we have what in
film we call a jump cut.
>>REGINA: Right, what happened.
>>DAVIDS: There's 18
years are not mentioned.
There's one sentence
in Luke that says
and Jesus grew in wisdom
and in stature and in favor
with God and man.
And that covers 18 years of--
>>REGINA: That's a catch-all.
>>DAVIDS: --one of the
most important personages
of all of history.
So the question arises why
is all of that left out.
Because in the Bible
you next see Jesus
by the River Jordan being
baptized by his cousin John.
And it says that Jesus got
to be around 30 years of age
at that point.
Now how did I come upon this?
I met Edward T. Martin
at a conference.
Actually I think it was
2002 when we first met.
And he had a book called
"King of Travelers,
Jesus' Lost Years in India."
I thought it was
very curious and I
like curious and unusual topics.
And he pointed out
to me that there
is a book of Muslims sayings
that is well known by Muslims
that refers to Jesus.
They called him Saint Issa.
It refers to him as
the king of travelers
or the prince of
travelers, the concept
being that he traveled more
than any other contemporary
of his time.
He wasn't just in
Galilee and Judea.
But his journey was to reunite
the lost tribes of Israel.
And they were
scattered, and many
were scattered to the east.
And that included India,
a lot of evidence of this.
>>REGINA: This is a really
fascinating part, which
we'll get into further on.
But I found that fascinating.
>>DAVIDS: But the
relationship with Ed--
just I'll fill in a
little more because he's
so important to the
story, in his book.
He's a mountain climber.
He's an adventurer.
He's from Texas.
He hunts with a bow and arrow.
>>REGINA: He's from
fundamentalist country too.
>>DAVIDS: He was raised as a
fundamentalist and he liked it.
His mother took them to
church three times a week,
and they were serious
about their churching.
>>REGINA: Yes they were.
>>DAVIDS: They liked it.
>>REGINA: You see
that in the film.
>>DAVIDS: They liked it.
And his problem with
his Church of Christ
was that he asked
too many questions.
They would say Ed why are
you worrying about that.
You worry about
your own salvation.
That's what Ed needs
to worry about,
not where Jesus was
during those 18 years.
What difference does it make?
Ed explains in the book that he
came upon this theory of Jesus
in India from a few
different sources.
One was Edgar Cayce.
He joined an Edgar
Cayce study group.
>>REGINA: That'll get you going.
>>DAVIDS: He found that this
great sleeping prophet had
said that Jesus was in India.
Then number two Ed came
across "The Aquarian Gospel
of Jesus the Christ" by Reverend
Dowling, a civil war writer.
This was channeled material.
Again, it said that Jesus spent
part of his life in India.
And I believe that
does mention Jagannath
where there was a famous Hindu
temple that's 2,500 years old.
That temple would've
been there for 500 years
by the time Jesus showed up.
So the idea of
going to Jagannath
and talking to the
head of Hinduism
and getting his
side of the story.
I mean we did this.
We actually did it.
>>REGINA: I know, it's amazing.
You really went to the lengths.
>>DAVIDS: We went
to the Dalai Lama.
>>REGINA: Yes you did.
>>DAVIDS: We went
to the Vatican.
We got to--
>>REGINA: And we're going
to hear from the Dalai
Lama in this as well
>>DAVIDS: It was incredible.
There was a third source
for Ed, the writings
of Paramahansa Yogananda.
Yogananda, the great
yogi who brought I think
responsible for bringing it--
>>REGINA: To the
Western world, sure.
>>DAVIDS: --yoga to
the Western world
and founded the
self-realization fellowship,
which is very important today.
Yogananda died in
the early 1950s,
but his writings such as
"Autobiography of a Yogi,"
are revered today,
very, very widely read.
And Yogananda claimed that Jesus
was in India for those-- a lot
of those missing years.
We're not saying
the whole 18 years,
but that he took the
Silk Road to the east.
Now his explanation was that the
three wise men were from India.
That's been debated.
Where were they from?
Who knows.
Were they Persians.
>>REGINA: Some say Persia.
Yeah, exactly.
>>DAVIDS: Yeah, your Persia.
Yogananda said no, no, no.
The gifts were gold,
incense, and myrrh,
and those were traditional
gifts that Indian holy men would
bestow upon worthy individuals.
So he claimed that they had
an influence in Jesus' life
and he was essentially
repaying the visit.
And even in the Aquarian gospel
it talks about a Prince Ravanna
I believe from India who
became a sort of patron.
Now is any of this true?
>>REGINA: The point is
these were the influences
to start him on this
amazing journey.
>>DAVIDS: That's right.
He started and he
badgered his minister.
>>REGINA: We're
going to show a clip.
Do you mind?
In a moment.
>>DAVIDS: We can do that.
>>REGINA: We need to
show where Ed came from
and what he was up against.
He lost a lot of
credibility, a lot
of street cred in his community
and certainly with the church,
and among his family and
so forth for pursuing
this crazy odyssey to again
uncover these missing years.
>>DAVIDS: Regina, he
comes from a world
of no drinking, no dancing,
three times a week at church.
So his persistence
after he heard
about the possibility
of Jesus in India
got him blackballed
from a church
that his family had been
members of for their whole life.
>>REGINA: His whole life.
So let's take a look
at the clip of some
of his former colleagues in
the church and his minister.
>>DAVIDS: Yes.
>>Well, we're I guess you'd say
fundamental as far as scripture
is concerned.
>>We believe every
word of it, yes.
>>It was understood we
were not supposed to dance.
We weren't supposed to drink.
Gambling was a no-no.
I've known Ed Martin for
I guess 50 years since he
was a little boy certainly.
I'm not sure how old Ed
is, but I've known him
I guess all of his life.
Ed has always been
out there on the edge.
The difference between being
a visionary and being crazy
is a very small
difference sometimes.
And none of us know-- none of
us know what that difference is.
Ed's grasp of reality and
mine are not the same thing.
>>He has always wandered
around and he enjoys traveling.
And he just never
has settled in.
And that's all right because
that's what he wants to do.
But that's not what the
rest of us do of course.
That's different
is what I'm saying.
>>REGINA: Anyway, I think
we can see that what he did
was quite a departure
from what he came from.
And I just had
to-- I just wanted
to show that because it
took a lot of courage
for him to go on this odyssey.
>>DAVIDS: He risked
everything to pursue the--
>>REGINA: He risked everything.
>>DAVIDS: Now when he
was young he decided
to join the Peace Corps.
It was the early 1970s and
they sent him to Afghanistan.
He wanted to go to India.
But he felt that being
in Afghanistan at least
he would be close to India.
And so he accepted
that assignment
to teach English as
a second language.
And before he
departed his mother
ran into an old high school
friend who-- they hadn't
seen each other in years.
This man had become
a diplomat in India.
And when she told him
of her son's ambition
he said I've got to talk to him.
And the conversation between
this man and Ed was pivotal.
It was as though it was fated.
It was one of those
things that had
to happen because this diplomat
said if you go to India
you must go to Kashmir.
And it was Ed's decision
to go to Kashmir
that opened up for
him an immense part
of the hidden story
about Jesus in India.
>>REGINA: In an area which
since has had so much conflict.
And we're going to
show a bit of film
at the end about what
he was up against trying
to get to the crypt.
>>DAVIDS: Regina,
when we decided--
>>REGINA: You were scared.
I mean you had--
>>DAVIDS: Yes.
>>REGINA: --really terrorist
activities following you.
>>DAVIDS: He was there
in his younger years
during his Afghanistan days.
But when we were there
with the film crew,
and I'll say that when
the movie actually
happened we had a film crew that
was mainly Hindus from India.
I think there was one Muslim
who helped us, particularly
in Kashmir, because
Kashmir is divided
between the Muslims
and the Hindus.
And there's sort of a
silent war always going on.
There's soldiers on
every block with rifles.
And here we work,
two Americans landing
into that situation at
a time when the State
Department advised against it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, don't go.
>>DAVIDS: It wasn't
forbidden, but we
should have known better.
It was sort of the--
>>REGINA: Well, as you say
in the documentary it seemed
like you were able to
get through each step
you needed, but within 24
hours some kind of terror
was following on your
heels in that exact place
you'd been the day before.
So it took a lot of courage
for you guys to do this.
>>DAVIDS: Regina,
we did feel as if we
were protected on this journey.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>DAVIDS: And to give
you some examples,
we were going to go to
a famous Krishna temple.
I forget if it was in the
place of Krishna's birth.
But we canceled that
part of the trip.
And there was a terrorist
attack there at that Temple.
We would have been there.
And in Kashmir, the
area that we were at,
there were a number
of people murdered,
killed within days
of our departure.
>>REGINA: The
force was with you.
>>DAVIDS: The force was with us.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DAVIDS: We asked for the
blessing of Yogananda before we
went and--
>>REGINA: So this
was your own odyssey.
Now going back to
the life of Jesus
and what has been
speculated and what
looks like it may very well
have some historical roots
that are valid-- that
you have validated.
I mean to the extent
you could, considering
you're getting a lot of
resistance out of this.
You're talking about a young--
>>DAVIDS: We call it a
2,000 year old cold case.
>>REGINA: Yeah, cold case.
And so in this cold
case you're talking
about a young man who
by the age of 12, 13
his elders were listening to
with reverence, because he was
speaking such incredibly-- not
just esoteric but sophisticated
wisdoms beyond his
peers, beyond the sages
and rabbis of the day.
So he was a respected young man.
So of course we already know
he's imbued with something.
And now it's thought that
he may have taken off
with a caravan along
the Silk Route.
>>DAVIDS: Well, that was the
way to get to the east in those
days.
I mean Jerusalem was
a cosmopolitan city.
There were people
from China there.
There were people from India.
>>REGINA: All kinds of a
trading going on, yeah.
>>DAVIDS: Traders, traders.
Now in the Jewish tradition
of course he reaches 13.
He would have been
bar mitzvahed,
which means you're a man
now and you get married.
That's the next thing that
happens in those days.
You're an eligible bachelor.
They're going to
find a mate for you.
Well, he didn't marry.
And that kind of
lends credibility
to the idea that he
didn't remain there
but joined a caravan and
departed for the east.
That's the theory.
And then the question
is, after 2,000 years,
and with a little help from
Elizabeth Clare Prophet
and in her book, "The Lost
Years of"-- and a little help
from German writer
Holger Kersten,
"Jesus Lived in
India," can we find
some pretty convincing evidence
that it really happened.
And I think that there's a
lot that favors that that we
can really put on the table.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about the Pakistani beer.
Now we're going to
start with the lowest
element of culture, which
is having one at happy hour.
But the name of this
particular beer,
just to show how deep
a part of the native
culture the presence
of Issa was.
>>DAVIDS: Well yes, I mean but
this beer was called Murree.
>>REGINA: I understand.
>>DAVIDS: It's a
town in Pakistan.
It's spelled M-U-R-R-E-E. And
when Ed was in the Peace Corps
in Afghanistan you
couldn't find liquor there.
It's a Muslim area.
But there was a certain American
section where it was allowed
and you could get a beer.
And he said he met a
man named Mr. Wilson who
was the bartender and
he saw this Murree beer.
And he said, well
that's an English name.
What's that doing?
And Mr. Wilson said,
well that's Murree.
That's Mary.
That's mother of Jesus, Sahib,
most assuredly mother of Jesus.
The town named after her.
She is buried there in Pakistan.
>>REGINA: This will
make a lot of people
upset that think that she
might be up north in England.
No, no in England.
>>DAVIDS: Oh, some
say England and some
say she ascended bodily.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
Glastonbury and all, yeah.
>>DAVIDS: Well, the
point is he hears a story
about a tomb in Pakistan.
Now Suzanne Olsson is a
writer who has investigated
this very thoroughly.
She's written books about
it, the tomb of Mary
in Murree, Pakistan.
Why would they
possibly believe this?
This has to do with the second
part of the story really,
so we're really jumping
ahead here because--
>>REGINA: OK, let's
not jump ahead.
I just want to say we've got
a beer here that validates
Jesus was in India OK.
>>DAVIDS: We've got Mary.
>>REGINA: Because
his mother was there
and his mother went with him.
OK fine.
So now we can there--
I know one area
that you think for you in
this story is really profound.
We can jump right to that.
And that has to do with a
book by Nicolas Notovitch.
>>DAVIDS: Yes,
Nicolas Notovitch.
We're back now in 1890-- wait,
let me see, I think 1887.
He was on an expedition.
He was Jewish.
He converted--
>>REGINA: Russian.
>>DAVIDS: --to Catholicism.
And he's on an
expedition that takes him
to Hemis Monastery
in Ladakh, India.
This is around 14,000 feet
elevation, very rarefied.
It's a part of the world
that very few people
would get there.
And Notovitch had an
accident, fell off a horse,
broke his leg, and he had to
spend many, many weeks there
at the monastery.
And during that time the
monks confided in him
that they had an
ancient manuscript there
that told of the life of
Jesus that told of his travels
in India.
And he was shown
this manuscript.
Now these manuscripts
themselves,
they look very, very unusual.
I mean it's one page at a time.
It's like it's on leather.
I don't know.
>>REGINA: It was long.
>>DAVIDS: Yeah, there
are these long pieces
one after the other.
But this book was called
"The Life of Saint Issa,
The Best of the Sons of Men."
And Notovitch had help in
translating it from Tibetan.
This was written in Tibetan.
But he was told
that the original
was in Tibet in the poly
language, an older language.
And the claim was that
this went back to the time
just after the crucifixion.
And it told-- it begins
with the crucifixion,
and presumably written by
traders from the east at that
time who heard of
the crucifixion
and then tell the story of Saint
Issa and his travels in India,
starting from the time
that he was around 13.
And those travels
they said took him
to Jagannath, that ancient
temple that would've
been about 500 years old.
>>REGINA: Which is where some
of the top sages in the east
would have resided.
>>DAVIDS: Would have resided.
So the claim was
there in this story
that Jesus was in
Jagannath, like was
said in the Aquarian
gospel, which was supposedly
channeled information
from the Akashic records.
Who knows?
It's interesting.
>>REGINA: In that sense
it's all channeled.
>>DAVIDS: In that sense.
>>REGINA: Every
book is channeled,
every divine work is
channeled pretty much.
>>DAVIDS: But
here's Notovitch who
is able to translate this story
and he wants to publish it.
And he goes to Rome.
He speaks to an archbishop
of the Catholic Church
who he refuses to name who
discourages him and says, oh
why would you want to do that.
Nobody's going to
believe it and you're
going to have so many enemies.
But he did publish it.
He also claimed that the
archbishop confided in him
that the Vatican knew
all about Jesus in India,
that they had many documents
related to Jesus' travels
in India.
It's not part of
the official canon.
This, like many of the books
that were considered heretical
and erased from the
record when they decided
what were going to be the
books of the New Testament
and the letters, and the
epistles, and that's it.
Everything else was eliminated.
>>REGINA: Book of Thomas
eliminated, others.
>>DAVIDS: Destroyed.
Well, it was buried in
the desert in Egypt.
So Notovitch publishes the book
under the name "The Secret Life
of Jesus Christ."
And it causes a furor,
a sensation and a furor.
I think it was in
19-- no, it was 1894
when that book was published.
So this is what really brought
the Jesus in India concept
to the forefront.
But it got the attention of
so many important people.
For example Nehru, the first
prime minister of India
indicated that the belief
was very, very strong
that Jesus had been in
northern India and Kashmir,
Ladakh, that region.
So that gave it
further credibility.
In any event, there was
a skeptic or debunker
at that time, Max Muller,
who was a scholar.
I believe he was from England,
who attacked Notovitch
so bitterly, claiming he
made the whole thing up.
It was all a forgery.
So many Christians have
relied upon the debunking
of Max Muller to dismiss
this without knowing
the rest of the story.
The rest of the story is
fascinating, it's fabulous.
It's what gives it the
meat and credibility.
And it explained a
lot of our journey
in India, because for
us this was a quest.
If we could actually see
this document and proved
it still existed.
If we could even prove
the chain of those
who saw it subsequently
that that had validity,
what a contribution
we would be making.
And this is really what we were
able to do in this 4,000 mile
quest, not to actually
see the document.
We didn't succeed in that,
although we got to Hemis.
We have an interview with one
of the top monks from Hemis.
So we have an inside story
that hasn't been heard before.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: So
let's-- yes, go ahead.
>>DAVIDS: So here's the chain.
>>REGINA: Yes, that's right.
>>DAVIDS: From Notovitch
we go to Swami Abhedananda.
He lived in Calcutta.
He was a scholar.
He's written many
books, wonderful books.
They have a tremendous
psychology to them.
He's an expert in
Vedanta philosophy.
And there's still
a hermitage there
in his name with monks that
have kept his quarters where
he lived exactly as they were.
Thomas Edison visited
there in India.
>>REGINA: Yes, you have a
piece in the film on this.
>>DAVIDS: Yes, he gifted Swami
Abhedananda his own gramophone.
>>REGINA: I was
thinking we should
take a little peek at that.
Shall we?
>>DAVIDS: Let's see it.
>>REGINA: Let's take a look.
>>And Swami Abhedananda lives
for about 20 years in America
and during that time-- 25
years, 25 years in America.
And then Swami Abhedananda
made a journey to Hemis Gompa
and found, he
was-- Thomas Edison
gave this to Swami Abhedananda.
>>REGINA: So that's fascinating.
So you wonder, OK what's
Thomas Edison doing there.
>>DAVIDS: He was interested
in Indian philosophy.
And Abhedananda had
a superb reputation
and he wanted to know if there
was truth to the Notovitch
document.
So he went to Hemis.
He was shown the document.
He translated it again, so I
think into Sanskrit this time,
so confirmation that
it really exists.
And that was in I believe 1922.
Following that up,
just a few years later
a great Russian explorer, an
artist, very respected man,
a remarkable man named Nicholas
Roerich leads an expedition
to that part of the world
and he gets to Hemis.
And he not only
confirms the document,
but he sends stories
back that get
to the top newspapers in New
York at that time, and in Italy
where it comes to the
attention of the Vatican.
And these newspaper
headlines there in our movie
and they're a remarkable
piece of history,
where the Western
world is being told
we've got a manuscript, ancient,
says that Jesus was in India.
Well, the Vatican
responded with skepticism.
Although it was very
interesting that--
>>REGINA: Well, the Vatican
responded with skepticism
when you guys went to them too.
>>DAVIDS: Sure, of course.
It's their job.
>>REGINA: It's their job.
>>DAVIDS: It's their job.
But they did make a
point in connection
with their skeptical
response that they were not
questioning the
integrity of Nicholas
Roerich or his sincerity.
>>REGINA: That's good enough.
>>DAVIDS: But the
question is, if we
had our hands on this document,
science could study it and tell
us how old it is.
Now in the Hemis
monastery they said
this was a copy of the
original from Tibet.
You'd need the
original wouldn't you?
Because as the point is made by
Monsignor Corrado Balducci who
we saw at the Vatican, and
he was apostolic nuncio
of John Paul II.
He was a representative
in Washington, also
the Vatican's head
exorcist for many years.
And he kindly consented
to an interview.
We ambushed him.
He said, look he thinks
this is, he said in Italian,
"falsa, falsa, falsa."
Well, he said look,
in India certainly
they wrote this
manuscript after they
knew the full story of Jesus.
So he said he claims
it's an invention.
The Vatican doesn't
accept it he says.
>>REGINA: He forgets that
it would have-- well, I
guess it wouldn't
have pre-dated,
but it would have pre-dated
any text that they have.
>>DAVIDS: The problem
is if we had our hands
on the original text
and science could study,
they could really tell us.
Because if it was written 500
years after the crucifixion,
well why should we believe it.
Except it does mention
Jagannath as one of the places
that Jesus went to.
>>REGINA: So this
keeps coming up.
>>DAVIDS: It keeps coming up.
So we went to Puri where
Jagannath Temple is, which
is a great center of Hinduism.
The original temple exists.
>>REGINA: OK now let's-- let me
just get to something before we
go there and set this up.
>>DAVIDS: Sure.
>>REGINA: James
Deardorff was saying
that Islam does
not believe-- and I
think this is kind
of critical to it,
they do not believe that
Jesus died in the crucifixion.
And this has been brought up
in other streams of thought
as well and other
schools of thought
that he didn't die in the
crucifixion per se, that he was
simply elevated from there
or suffered, was taken down,
and then left and moved on,
and went back in later life,
back to the east.
Where as we say the Mother
Mary and Jesus supposedly die.
We haven't gotten there yet.
So the point is not
everybody believes
he died in the crucifixion,
particularly Islam.
>>DAVIDS: Well, what you've
just said about Islam is true.
But the trip to
Jagannath by Jesus
would be during those
missing years of 13 to 30.
So we're not the--
>>REGINA: We're not at that yet.
>>DAVIDS: --question of
after the crucifixion yet.
>>REGINA: You're right.
>>DAVIDS: And what's
important is, well
when we went to Puri first
of all we were fascinated
by the fact that a hermitage
that Paramahansa Yogananda had
studied at with his guru Sri
Teswar was located nearby.
And we were able to visit.
We were received with open arms.
But the question is
could we get an interview
with the Shankaracharya.
It's like getting an
interview with the pope.
>>REGINA: With the pope, yeah.
>>DAVIDS: And we're
waiting day by day
to see can we get an interview.
And I have a fellow
producer who I
invited into the project
who's from India, Anil Urmil.
And he had some
family connections
and he was-- he
got the word to me
that we may be able to meet
with the Shankaracharya
but you won't be
able to film him.
You won't be able to
have an interview.
You probably will not even be
able to have your picture taken
with him to prove.
>>REGINA: He didn't know
you had the force with you.
>>DAVIDS: He didn't.
He didn't know.
None of us knew that.
Because when we got
there-- well, what he said
is there's an American
filmmaker here.
And he loves
Paramahansa Yogananda
and the Shankaracharya.
He said oh, then
this Paul Davids, I
must consider him
an honorary Hindu.
>>REGINA: Interesting OK.
>>DAVIDS: Come, come.
>>REGINA: That's how it--
>>DAVIDS: You have a camera.
Let's talk about Jesus in India.
I will tell you.
So we go into this room and
some of his followers are there.
There are four
Shankaracharyas in Hinduism.
But the one we met with is
like the leader of them all.
So this was like a
meeting with the pope.
And I don't know
what language he
spoke in-- Anil translated it.
We have subtitles.
But we asked him and
he said, oh absolutely.
Jesus was here.
He said you know the tradition
a Shankaracharya goes back
2,500 years approximately.
And Jesus would have met the
Shankaracharya of that day.
And he was here for
years studying with us
and learning the scriptures,
the Hindu scriptures.
And he listed what Jesus
would have studied there,
and that there was-- let's
see if I can remember.
But it was a truthfulness,
compassion, service to others,
patience, love, all of the--
>>REGINA: Virtues.
>>DAVIDS: --all of the virtues.
And certainly patience is one
of the virtues of Hinduism
and Buddhism I
think, maybe more so
than what we have in the West.
But he could not produce
the ancient scrolls
that would have supported this.
He said that during ancient
invasions these were all hidden
and they don't have
access to them today.
But this is a
tradition that has been
known by all the Shankaracharyas
going back to the days of Jesus
that he was there.
Now this was the first
time I think in history
that a filmmaker had
gotten a religious leader
of this magnitude to make
those statements, which
were completely diametrically
opposite to what
we heard from Monsignor
Balducci at the Vatican.
And in editing
this movie I think
one of the key
points of it is when
I cut the two of them together
back to back saying completely
contradictory things.
Now the secret life of Jesus
the Christ, that document
from Hemis monastery, it says
that Jesus got into trouble
in his days among the Hindus.
>>REGINA: Found that-- yes, I
found that fascinating, yes.
>>DAVIDS: It paints
a picture of Jesus
that is completely consistent
with the Jesus that we know.
It's not an all honey and
roses picture of Jesus there.
>>REGINA: No, well, Jesus was
considered to be an activist.
>>DAVIDS: He challenged.
>>REGINA: He challenged
people, and certainly
the people in Rome didn't
care much for his ways.
>>DAVIDS: Yes, well
he-- what he did was
object to the caste system.
You can't do that among Hindus.
They have four castes.
>>REGINA: The Brahmin,
he said this is--
>>DAVIDS: The Brahmins,
those are the top people.
He objected to how they
were so aloof and put
themself in such a privileged
position up on a pedestal.
So he attacked the Brahmins.
And the lowest caste of course
would be the untouchables.
Well, you certainly
wouldn't read to them
the holy scriptures.
They'll get to hear the holy
scriptures when they come back
on their next incarnation,
if they're lucky enough
to be further up the
chain, but not now.
Well, he violated that.
He anchored them to the
point where an assassin
was hired to do away with him.
Now this is the story in
that ancient manuscript.
And it's completely
consistent with the Jesus
who in Judea in Israel.
He would've gone into
the temple and thrown
over the tables of
the money changers,
and saying not in
my father's house.
>>REGINA: He spoke his
truth wherever he went.
>>DAVIDS: Yeah, it's
supportive of that.
This is fascinating.
Well, the claim is that then
he left and he went northward
actually to the land of the
birthplace of the Buddha.
I don't think I can pronounce
it, but as part of his journey
there.
So we had this confirmation
from the Shankaracharya.
What we really needed was
to get to Hemis monastery
and find out what's
their position.
Can we see the document?
>>REGINA: You made it there.
>>DAVIDS: Well we-- I
sent part of my crew.
>>REGINA: Yeah OK.
>>DAVIDS: I couldn't
personally go.
>>REGINA: Part of
the crew, all right.
>>DAVIDS: As a matter of fact--
>>REGINA: I didn't know if you
actually personally had or not.
>>DAVIDS: 14,000 feet would've
been a little tough for me.
>>REGINA: Too much for you.
Yeah.
>>DAVIDS: Ed has climbed
a lot of mountains
and he really
wanted to go there.
But when we had been
to Kashmir, that
was going to be our
next destination.
We were going to fly to
Ladakh and go to Hemis.
Let me backtrack and tell
you what happened to us.
We heard that the plane we were
assigned to that we had tickets
for, that the prime
minister or the head,
the president of Kashmir was
going to be on that plane
with many people who worked
with him from the government.
And there had been multiple
assassination attempts
against him.
And the day before we
heard on the street
through the Muslim who
was part of our crew
that everyone on
the street seemed
to know that this man was
going to be on that plane.
And it was probably going
to be a target and somebody
might try to shoot it down.
So we decided, well we're
not going out on that plane.
Well we hadn't brought much
money with us to Kashmir.
We figured well we'll charge it,
tickets to get another plane.
First of all there wasn't
another plane out to Ladakh
that was going to work.
And second of all they
didn't accept charge cards,
and we were out of money.
We didn't even have
enough money to stay
in a hotel another night there.
We were on Dal Lake
in a houseboat.
We were really stuck.
We were there in the airport,
which was our refuge.
And we knew they were going
to kick us out of the airport
soon because we didn't
have a valid ticket.
Calls were made to one of our
associate producers in India.
And I think it was
a Sunday and he
had to get a banker he knew
to go into a bank on a Sunday
and wire the money to
get us out of there.
It was absolutely harrowing
because we were Americans there
and we were targets.
I went into a little curio shop.
We were trying to
use a telephone
to call this man in India.
And there were some
people who came in
and they sold knives
in this curio shop.
And someone picked up a knife
and was gleefully playing
with it and pointing it at me.
Could I be another little
notch on his knife.
So it wasn't fun.
It was scary.
So we didn't get to
Hemis on that trip.
Later I sent my assistant
director who is Hindu.
And he got the footage up
there and he got an interview
with one of the top people.
>>REGINA: Yes, that's the
one I'm referring to, yes.
>>DAVIDS: Top people
from the Hemis monk.
This interview was
really curious.
>>REGINA: Should we
take a look at it
and then you can explain
to us what this meant.
Let's take a look.
>>The lamas were not allowed
to open the archives which
are just bound with strings.
But the head lama, who
had given the orders
that they were sealed and
should not be opened until he
returned.
>>DAVIDS: What we knew
from that interview
was that they had many, many
ancient manuscripts there.
You could see them and
they're on these shelves.
And the lama explains,
well it's locked.
You can't touch that.
What does he mean by a lock?
It's not exactly what we
mean by a lock in the West.
>>REGINA: A lock and key, yeah.
>>DAVIDS: It's not
a combination lock.
It doesn't have a key.
It's a piece of yarn.
It's a piece of string tied to
hold the two doors together.
Why is that a lock?
Because it's been commanded
by their head lama.
You don't open those
until I'm back.
>>REGINA: He's been gone
for years hasn't he?
>>DAVIDS: Yes, yes.
>>REGINA: No one knows when
he's coming back, if ever.
>>DAVIDS: Is he coming back?
He left as a boy.
And he was in Tibet and then
the Chinese communists come.
Do they even know
if he's still alive?
But they say that their
translation project
of the documents is held up.
>>REGINA: Until he returns,
which may be never.
>>DAVIDS: Until he
returns, of course.
>>REGINA: Wait
for the next lama.
>>DAVIDS: Of course,
now and the other thing
about the answer that
was so curious was
the person we were interviewing
said, look it's not up to me
to tell you.
I can't do this alone,
because this could involve--
it could be so sensational
that it would have
to be done by the committee.
It can't be one person
making the decision alone.
This could have repercussions
if we were able to confirm this
and I don't if we can.
I personally don't know where
the document would be he said.
But he said I have
heard the stories too.
He said researchers
have come here
who've said they talked
to the Dalai Lama,
and that the Dalai Lama
had confirmed privately
for them that when
he was a boy in Tibet
he saw that version of
the document of Issa.
>>REGINA: The document that
Nicolas-- the secret life
of Jesus Christ.
>>DAVIDS: Yes, the
story of Saint Issa
that he sought in
the poly language
it would have been at the
Maribor monastery in Tibet
and that the Dalai
Lama was aware of it.
So the men we were
interviewing said look,
we can't say that this-- we
don't know where it would be.
Now I'm asking why wouldn't
they know where it would be.
Because when we know that
Nicolas Notovitch saw it.
Swami Abhedananda saw it.
Nicholas Roerich saw it.
Madame Caspari saw it.
We have two translations of it.
It exists.
Max Muller who debunked the
whole thing absolutely wrong.
And I wish all of the Christian
websites who are still
claiming that it's
a made up story
because Max Muller proved
that would back off and change
their position.
That's absolutely wrong.
It does exist or it did exist.
The question is how old is it
and why can't we see it today.
Is the reason we
can't see it today
because the Vatican
made arrangements
to take possession of it,
sometime maybe in the 1930s
after Madame Caspari saw it.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: It
could be, yeah absolutely.
>>DAVIDS: That it
is no longer there.
Or they have instructions that
they can't show it to anybody
because of the
explosion or the furor
it would make in the
whole Christian world.
If the Vatican had to address
the fact that there really
is information
about those missing.
>>REGINA: Well, and that
his teachings were heavily
influenced by eastern thought.
>>DAVIDS: That too.
>>REGINA: They're so
terrified of that.
>>DAVIDS: Well,
they won't go there.
They disallow it.
It all came from
divine knowledge
because of who he was, as
the story of the Vatican--
>>REGINA: As though it's
less divine if you go
and you have knowledge
presented to you
and experienced elsewhere.
>>DAVIDS: But the point of view
of those in the east in India
particularly is-- and
India, which is a country
divided between
Hindus and Muslims.
Yes there are Catholics there.
There are Christians,
certainly in Goa where we were.
But most of the Muslims
ended up in Pakistan
after the division of the
country after the British left.
And most Hindu-- India
itself is mainly Hindu.
But you have these
two different cultures
that both know of the
story of Saint Issa.
So their feeling is that if
Christianity acknowledged
Jesus' travels in India, that
he was the king of travelers,
that it would have a soothing
and bonding and binding
effect on the disparities
between the religions.
>>REGINA: So that's where the
comment by Sir Jonathan Sacks
comes in, because he's
trying to find a way
to look at these
religions and he
thinks this might be
the bonding agent.
If these years of Jesus,
having been heavily
influence and respectful of
both Buddhism and Hinduism,
could be the bond that would
bridge all of these cultures
spiritually once and for all.
>>DAVIDS: Yes, in our film
it's a famous rabbi professor
from Loyola University who makes
that point and talks about what
is the Jewish perspective
on these questions.
And of course Judaism doesn't
incorporate Jesus, certainly
not as a messiah
and doesn't even
know whether to acknowledge
the historicity of whether he
really lived.
>>REGINA: Existed, right.
>>DAVIDS: So
Judaism doesn't have
a point of view about that.
But they do have the point of
view that if Jesus did exist,
certainly he was more Jewish
than most contemporary Jews
in the United States today.
Certainly he kept kosher.
We know that the Last
Supper was Passover.
So he comes firmly from
a Judaic tradition.
But the picture of Jesus
that emerges from this
is one who sought
the missing tribes.
>>REGINA: Which were disbursed
throughout the Middle
East and the Near East.
>>DAVIDS: Yes, and then
came back to Israel
to preach a new
way of life which
had the virtues of
those other religions
and was opposed to
the Old Testament
philosophy of an eye
for an eye, that you
repay violence with violence
and the vengeful god
of the Old Testament who
was always sending plagues
upon mankind.
He preached a
different approach.
It was unpopular among
the Romans and the Jews
at that time.
He ended up on across.
So nevertheless, the
Hindus and the Muslims
that I talked to
in India all felt,
oh if only the West would
acknowledge this how
it would bring us all together.
That Jesus instead of being a
dividing between our religions
would now be Saint Issa who
brings us all closer together.
>>REGINA: Well, and
there are other hallmarks
of that presence.
You brought up Judaism,
there are oddly
a lot of-- the presence of a
lot of Jewish or Hebrew names
in India for example.
It's like how did that happen.
And the thought is that some
of the missing tribes of Israel
may well have been
that far east.
>>DAVIDS: Yes, as
a matter of fact
we talk in the film
about someone who
received a commission to do
research and study on behalf
of the government of India
as to why there are so
many Hebrew names of places
spread out throughout India.
And in Kashmir the
connections are even stronger.
There is the theory
that the Kasmiris
are one of the lost
tribes, that the language
has many common root
words as Hebrew.
Customs are similar, tools,
even the shape of the paddle
used at Dal Lake was
the shape of a heart
shaped paddle that was--
>>REGINA: That was an
interesting part of the film
as well.
You had the physical
evidence for that.
>>DAVIDS: And there's a
genetic confirmation connecting
the people of Kashmir.
>>REGINA: The DNA pools, yes.
>>DAVIDS: So is it far fetched
that Jesus, if his mission was
to reunite the lost tribes,
is it far-fetched that he
would have gone to Kashmir.
No, of course not.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about the presence
of Saint Thomas in India.
>>DAVIDS: It's a great point.
It really is a great point.
Because for those Christians
who have a problem
with the idea of
Jesus' travels, they
should ask themselves why did
Jesus send Thomas to India.
Why was it Saint
Thomas, doubting
Thomas who goes to India
and founds a church there
and spreads Christianity
for the first time in India.
>>REGINA: Which
exists to this day.
>>DAVIDS: You could go.
We did go.
And it's in the film to
the Church of Saint Thomas.
It's probably been rebuilt but
that's where his church was.
And there is a cathedral for
Thomas there, a Thomas museum.
And the confirmation that this
part of the Christian story
is true you can take
from Pope John Paul
II who went there to pay homage
to Saint Thomas, went to India.
>>REGINA: So a precedent
of travelers in association
with Jesus who had gone
to India has already
been well established.
>>DAVIDS: Yes, one of
the original apostles
spends the rest of his life
and dies after about 20 years
there.
He's assassinated by
a Hindu by the way.
But devotes himself to the
introduction of Christianity
into that culture and
Christianity spreads.
And there are Catholic
communities now.
Certainly Goa is very
Catholic, I would say.
The Portuguese brought it.
>>REGINA: Portuguese, but
that wasn't reflected back
into any of the gospels
that were then handed down
into the Christian world.
That was a missing gospel
as a matter of fact.
Again, the refusal
to allow eastern
thought into that particular
document, the Bible.
>>DAVIDS: This
could be a good time
to get into the missing gospels.
>>REGINA: Can I read
one statement here?
It's a biblical passage that has
left a lot of people scratching
their heads.
Now if you take eastern
thought into consideration
it makes perfect sense.
This is from Jesus.
Blessed is the one
who came into being
before he came into being.
>>DAVIDS: That's from
the Gospel of Thomas.
And Elaine Pagels of
Princeton University--
>>REGINA: I love that.
>>DAVIDS: --she talks
about that in the film.
It seems to suggest
reincarnation.
>>REGINA: It certainly does.
I mean that's just
one-- I just want
to throw one little
tidbit out before we go
into the other missing gospels.
>>DAVIDS: Yes, the
Gospel of Thomas
was found in India in a jar.
It was dug up by a Bedouin
who was digging for fertilizer
or something like that.
And lots of ancient Christian
manuscripts, gospels
were found there that
have been widely studied.
And these were ones that had
been rejected for inclusion
in the Christian Bible.
>>REGINA: Of course.
>>DAVIDS: So the Gospel of
Thomas, which Elaine Pagels
speculates may in its
philosophy be closer
to the original
Christianity than some
of what's in the New Testament.
The kingdom of
heaven is within you.
>>REGINA: Is within you,
that's the other one.
>>DAVIDS: It's a yogic idea.
>>REGINA: Totally yogic.
>>DAVIDS: Go within, meditation.
You'll find the presence of God.
>>REGINA: Don't be looking to
the outside for validation,
forgiveness, permission.
Go inside, you already know.
>>DAVIDS: Yes, and that you
can have your own contact
with divinity.
>>REGINA: But that whole
notion of self-empowerment
isn't really big in either the
Catholic or Protestant belief
systems.
>>DAVIDS: Are we
that short on time
because we haven't
talked about Yuz Asaf.
>>REGINA: We're going
to go-- actually
that's where I was going to go
instead of the missing gospel.
>>DAVIDS: Let's go there.
>>REGINA: OK, because
we go there instead.
Let's do that, because
I want to also get
that film clip from the bomb.
>>DAVIDS: From the
Muslims near the tomb.
>>REGINA: From the
So first of all,
tell us what we're
going to be seeing and
tell us about that tomb.
And then we're going
to show the clip.
>>DAVIDS: Now this is the
most controversial part
of the Jesus in India
theory, that there
are some who take it way
beyond the 18 missing years
where we have all this evidence
I've been talking about.
And they offer the
theory that Jesus,
like the Muslims believe,
did not die on the cross.
Whether it's because
they didn't quite
finish the execution before
they brought him down
and ministered to help.
I mean it's a different
way of looking
at it than the miraculous way
that there was a resurrection.
So it contradicts with
Orthodox Christianity.
And no one here is saying
that this is true, but it's--
>>REGINA: Just talking
about one of the theories
and what's devoted to it.
>>DAVIDS: --interesting
that in Kashmir there
is a tomb of Yuz Asaf.
It sounds like Jesus in a way.
They say it's either Jesus the
gatherer or Jesus the healer.
And we went to Kashmir in
search of what evidence there
might be.
There are those who think
it's the tomb of Christ.
But I want to say
before I go there
that James Cameron, the great
director and Simcha Jacobovici
have done a wonderful
documentary on the tomb
of Jesus claiming
a tomb of Jesus
and his family has actually
been found in Israel.
Certainly both
stories can't be true,
and I don't know which one
has the stronger element.
But the Kashmir tomb we think--
>>REGINA: Well, let's bring
up politics for a moment.
He had already alienated
himself from the people,
from both as you
say both the church
and from the Hebrew community
at the time of his death
or crucifixion.
So as you stated in the film,
it would've been very consistent
in his character for him to
say I'm out of here if you did
survive it, to move on and
perhaps back two fields
that were a little
more receptive.
So it's possible if he did
live he would have moved on.
He could have gone right
back to India or Kashmir.
>>DAVIDS: To return to India.
He was a wanted man in Israel.
And on the way where was it
that he was physically seen
by Saint Paul?
On the road to Damascus.
That's Syria.
That's the way out of town.
>>REGINA: So now let's
go, now let's go ahead
and set up this tomb.
Once again before we
go to the comments
by the local Muslim hierarchy
that exists there today.
>>DAVIDS: Well, Ed Martin
had discovered a book written
by someone from Kashmir
whose name is Aziz Kashmiri,
and it's called
"Jesus in Kashmir."
This is what shocked
him because he
had been urged he had
to go to Kashmir if he
was going to India.
And he felt that
meeting Aziz Kashmiri
was the whole purpose of that.
That it was almost ordained
that he had to follow through
on that part of the mission.
Aziz Kashmiri's book gives
all the arguments why
the tomb of Yuz Asaf.
is the tomb of Christ.
The tomb itself is in
the east west direction,
which was a Jewish tradition.
The Hindus cremated their dead.
So this was prior to Islam.
It's an older tomb than that.
And there's a Temple
of Solomon in Kashmir,
which is a duplication
of the smaller
version of the original temple.
And there was inscription
on there going back
to the time of Yuz Asaf in
Kashmir declaring himself
a prophet of the
children of Israel.
That is compelling.
>>REGINA: It is.
>>DAVIDS: Now I know
Catholics who say,
look it didn't have
to be Christ himself.
It could've been one
of Christ's followers.
>>REGINA: It could have
been a different one, yes.
>>DAVIDS: Someone in his name,
someone preaching the gospel.
Jesus sent out many.
So we don't want
to say that this
is a-- but it's
interesting there
is the belief of many in
that part of the world that's
his tomb.
It's the belief of
the Ahmadiyya Muslims.
They experienced
prejudice against them
from all the other
branches of Islam.
They are punished.
They are sometimes murdered.
They're not allowed to
have pilgrimage to Mecca.
They have to convert.
>>REGINA: Well, because there
are very strong feelings
about this.
Let's go to the clip of film.
>>DAVIDS: Of what the
Muslim said at the tomb--
>>REGINA: What they
said at the tomb itself.
Let's just take a look.
This is vehement.
>>DAVIDS: It was heated.
>>REGINA: Heated.
Yeah so we can see we've
got a lot of bridge building
to still build here.
And one of the things that
was of interest on that tomb
too was the carvings
of the individual
where they showed the feet
of the person entombed--
>>DAVIDS: The feet
of the prophet.
>>REGINA: --which had holes
in it from what appear to be
crucifixion of some--
>>DAVIDS: Indicating
the crucifixion.
>>REGINA: And how old is that?
>>DAVIDS: Honestly
we don't know.
>>REGINA: Does anyone know?
>>DAVIDS: We don't know.
But now the Muslims near
there they cover it up.
>>REGINA: Right, they keep it
shuttered so no one can see it.
>>DAVIDS: As a
matter of fact, they
got the government to
lock up the whole tomb,
so no one is allowed in.
>>REGINA: So obviously
they're protecting something.
>>DAVIDS: It happened
because author Suzanne
Olson got permission
to go in there
and try and get a DNA sample.
>>REGINA: Right, right
she was a brave woman.
>>DAVIDS: And then
people got up in arms.
They didn't allow it to happen.
They locked up the tomb.
We weren't even allowed
to go in there to film.
We managed it.
Somehow we managed it.
And when the police
showed up and my crew
was nearly arrested, it was
only thanks to a soccer game
that they weren't
taken off to prison.
Because the policeman,
it turns out
had a son who was playing
in a soccer match in India.
That was the same soccer match
that my Indian producer--
so they talked soccer
instead of legalities.
>>REGINA: Jail time.
>>DAVIDS: Yes, yes.
>>REGINA: Thank God.
>>DAVIDS: It was amazing.
>>REGINA: Well, now we're out
of time I'm afraid to say.
But almost I just
think that before we
go the whole point is Ed wanted
to find for himself if there
was some kind of bridge that
bridged all of this together
and made these stories he'd
been hearing about true.
You didn't get your
hands on the document
but you got a lot of
evidence along the way.
And I think it's appropriate
to end this with the statement
from the Dalai Lama.
>>DAVIDS: Well,
before the Dalai Lama
speaks I want to say what Ed
said is is the old saying where
there's smoke there's fire.
>>REGINA: That's right.
>>DAVIDS: And he may not have
put his hands in the fire,
but he saw a lot of smoke.
>>REGINA: A lot
of smoke, exactly.
>>DAVIDS: We were able to
get to the Dalai Lama, who
in a letter to me actually
denied that he had
seen that document in Tibet.
It may have been something
done of official necessity,
but he had the courtesy to
respond to me from his office
to my question.
And he had the
courtesy to allow us
to let him sort of give the
wrap up to this whole story
about Jesus in India.
That tells us something
and he's wonderful.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
on that note, I
want to thank you so much
for your participation in it,
for coming and
sharing the story.
You're a wonderful storyteller.
And there's some-- just it's
a beautiful film, a really
beautiful film and a
very wonderful endeavor
on the part of Edward.
So I want to thank
you, him via you
as well if you talk to him OK.
>>DAVIDS: Thank you very much.
>>REGINA: And then we'll
finish with the Dalai Lama.
>>When we look in Hindu
history, and even today--
This earnest and
beautiful documentary
and journey for truth
can be purchased
by going to
JesusinIndiaTheMovie.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]